New devlog: "Clean, clean, clean!" (#581)
getsolus/help-center-docs: devlog/2024-11-20-clean-cleanl-clean.md

---
title: Clean, clean, clean!
slug: clean-clean-clean
authors: alfi
tags: [housekeeping, cleanup, devlog, solus]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

Hello everyone! Alfi here, member of Solus Cleanup Crew. It's been more than a year since I started contributing to Solus and I want to talk about it. About what I did, what we did, what we accomplished so far, and what we want to do next.

<!-- truncate -->

## A bit of background

> I started contributing on October 2023, when Solus participate in [Hacktoberfest](https://getsol.us/2023/10/01/solus-and-hacktoberfest-2023/). Hacktoberefest is a month-long event that encourage people to contribute to open source project in exchange for some digital merchandise. Finally, an excuse to contribute to something I use everyday. Although, as an accountant, all of this is new experience to me. It was confusing at first, but I persisted. Finally, I get the hang of it and I managed to submit around 100 pull request during the month of the event. I was very excited and motivated.During the month, a few people joined the event and contributed to Solus, but then November came and most of the contribution slowed down. I was the only one left that continue doing the beginner tasks, mostly adding homepage to packages.

Reviewer: Missing space:
> motivated.During

|5.| [Changing all package with homepage pointing to wiki.gnome.org](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/4116)|20-10-2024|87|62|
|6.| [Adding monitoring.yml](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/4121)|21-10-2024|3070|2937|
|7.| [Tagging packages that does not build](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Packaging+Problem%22)|Ongoing| N/A| 13
|8.| [Tagging packages that should be deprecated](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Package%3A+Removal+Request%22)|Ongoing| N/A| 25

As you can see from the table above, we just completed two tasks and we are close to completing homepage task. Packages that does not build also are also getting solved one by one. Right now, there are 12 people in Solus Cleanup Crew matrix room, 6 of them are new contributors. We also clean up our issue templates, implement better tagging system for organizing issues and much more. Solus Cleanup Crew is also becoming a place where we can onboard new contributors and recruit new staffs. I thought we accomplished a lot and I am happy with it.

## What next?

> We want to focus on adding appstream metainfo for remaining 200 packages, in line with the goal of 4.7 ISO. It will not be easy nor quick, but we will try our best. We want Solus user have best experience possible when we finally say goodbye to `solus-sc` and switch to modern sotware center (Gnome Software and KDE Discover). We want you to be able to install all graphical application from software center and have all the relevant information (Legible screenshot, Hi-Res Icon, good description, etc).

Reviewer: >We want Solus user have best experience

Should be:
We want Solus users to have the best experience

---
title: Clean, clean, clean!
slug: clean-clean-clean
authors: alfi
tags: [housekeeping, cleanup, devlog, solus]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

Hello everyone! Alfi here, member of Solus Cleanup Crew. It's been more than a year since I started contributing to Solus and I want to talk about it. About what I did, what we did, what we accomplished so far, and what we want to do next.

<!-- truncate -->

## A bit of background

> I started contributing on October 2023, when Solus participate in [Hacktoberfest](https://getsol.us/2023/10/01/solus-and-hacktoberfest-2023/). Hacktoberefest is a month-long event that encourage people to contribute to open source project in exchange for some digital merchandise. Finally, an excuse to contribute to something I use everyday. Although, as an accountant, all of this is new experience to me. It was confusing at first, but I persisted. Finally, I get the hang of it and I managed to submit around 100 pull request during the month of the event. I was very excited and motivated. During the month, a few people joined the event and contributed to Solus, but then November came and most of the contribution slowed down. I was the only one left that continue doing the beginner tasks, mostly adding homepage to packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I started contributing in October 2023, when Solus participated in [Hacktoberfest](https://getsol.us/2023/10/01/solus-and-hacktoberfest-2023/). Hacktoberfest is a month-long event that encourages people to contribute to open source projects in exchange for some digital merchandise. Finally, an excuse to contribute to something I use every day. Although, as an accountant, all of this is a new experience to me. It was confusing at first, but I persisted. Finally, I got the hang of it and I managed to submit around 100 pull request during the month of the event. I was very excited and motivated. During the month, a few people joined the event and contributed to Solus, but then November came and most of the contribution slowed down. I was the only one left that continued doing the beginner tasks, mostly adding homepage to packages.
```

> At the start January 2024, Jakub Nugen ([androidnisse](https://github.com/androidnisse)) comes in and start contributing to homepage task too. Worried that we would stepped on each other works, we started a private chat to organize the tasks between ourselves. Until May, the two of us have been chipping away the homepage task which at this point leaving 650 packages without homepage. Then we get more contributors joining. I decided to make a group chat to accomodate all the people joining. It was called "Solus Homepage Team" at the time. More contributors and staff members join the room, then it was renamed as "Solus Cleanup Crew" and moved under official Solus matrix space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the start of January 2024, Jakub Nugen ([androidnisse](https://github.com/androidnisse)) comes in and starts contributing to the homepage task too. Worried that we would step on each other's feet, we started a private chat to organize the tasks between ourselves. Until May, the two of us had been chipping away at the homepage task which at this point left 650 packages without a homepage. Then we had more contributors joining. I decided to make a group chat to accommodate all these new people. It was called "Solus Homepage Team" at the time. More contributors and staff members joined the room, then it was renamed as "Solus Cleanup Crew" and moved under the official Solus matrix space.
```

Seems like "the homepage task" is mentioned without first explaining what it is. Maybe add a short sentence to that effect somewhere in the beginning.
(also some native speaker better double-check some of my suggestions ^^)
((David already mentioned the accommodate thing, but I thought since I was already at it I'd mark it again for completeness' sake)

Author: I think it was already implied by the end of the first paragraph:
"I was the only one left that continued doing the beginner tasks, mostly adding homepage to packages."
Which from then on I refer as "homepage task"

## What is it?

> Solus cleanup crew is a group of bunch of community contributors as well staff members with the goal to bringing up Solus package repository up to current standard. It is a subset of the packaging room on our matrix channel. We organize the work on all the cleanup related tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Solus cleanup crew is a group of community contributors as well as staff members with the goal of bringing the Solus package repository up to current standard. It is a subset of the packaging room on our matrix channel. We organize the work on all the cleanup related tasks.
```

## Why bother?

> Solus has been updating their tooling and infrastucture since its resurection. While most of the tooling changes can be accomplished by staff members alone, there are things that they cannot do. While many consider Solus repository as small, it still contains more than 6000 packages. Some packages has never even got an update since Solus founded! We want to get rid of all its cruft before we can migrate to a better tooling. That's where the community contributor can come in and help.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Solus has been updating their tooling and infrastucture since its resurection. While most of the tooling changes can be accomplished by staff members alone, there are things that they cannot do. While many consider Solus repository as small, it still contains more than 6000 packages. Some packages have never even gotten an update since Solus was founded! We want to get rid of all its cruft before we can migrate to a better tooling. That's where the community contributor can come in and help.
```
 Probably better to use a different phrase than "since Solus was founded". Maybe "since Solus was first created", or something.

> For me personally, it is chance to learn something new and fill my time with more purpose. Sometime, I feel like a slob scrolling through things, opening the same three apps over and over or sleeping midday. Technically speaking, doing packaging is still scrolling through things, still opening the same three apps over and over, and I still get my midday nap, but now it is with purpose. I love that what I do can be enjoyed by other people. It is mostly invisible and not even noticed by people, but the chance of it helping people gives me so much joy. Why bother? Because I love it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For me personally, it is a chance to learn something new and fill my time with more purpose. Sometimes, I feel like a slob scrolling through things, opening the same three apps over and over or sleeping midday. Technically speaking, doing packaging is still scrolling through things, still opening the same three apps over and over, and I still get my midday nap, but now it is with purpose. I love that what I do can be enjoyed by other people. It is mostly invisible and not even noticed by people, but the chance of it helping people gives me so much joy. Why bother? Because I love it.
```

## What we accomplished

> We create a few repository wide task that can done with little reading of our packaging guide. The keen-eyed of you may have already seen these tasks. It is always attached at the end of every Sync Updates since July. These are the tasks we did:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We created a few repository wide tasks that can be done with little reading of our packaging guide. The keen-eyed of you may have already seen these tasks. It is always attached at the end of every Sync Updates since July. These are the tasks we did:
```

|No. | Task | Date Started | Start count | Current count|
|----|-------------| ------| ------------|--------------|
|1.| [Adding homepage key to package.yml](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/411)|30-09-2023|2300|8
|2.| [Adding AppStream metainfo to all font packages](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/449)|06-10-2023| 38 | Done 🎉|

> |3.| [Adding AppStream metainfo to all graphical application](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/1389)|22-01-2024|316|198|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|3.| [Adding AppStream metainfo to all graphical applications](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/1389)|22-01-2024|316|198|
```

> |4.| [Applying  new cargo macro](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/3111)|27-06-2024|37| Done 🎉|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|4.| [Applying new cargo macros](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/3111)|27-06-2024|37| Done 🎉|
```

> |5.| [Changing all package with homepage pointing to wiki.gnome.org](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/4116)|20-10-2024|87|62|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|5.| [Changing all packages with homepages pointing to wiki.gnome.org](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/4116)|20-10-2024|87|62|
```

|6.| [Adding monitoring.yml](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/4121)|21-10-2024|3070|2937|

> |7.| [Tagging packages that does not build](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Packaging+Problem%22)|Ongoing| N/A| 13

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|7.| [Tagging packages that do not build](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Packaging+Problem%22)|Ongoing| N/A| 13
```

|8.| [Tagging packages that should be deprecated](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Package%3A+Removal+Request%22)|Ongoing| N/A| 25

> As you can see from the table above, we just completed two tasks and we are close to completing homepage task. Packages that does not build also are also getting solved one by one. Right now, there are 12 people in Solus Cleanup Crew matrix room, 6 of them are new contributors. We also clean up our issue templates, implement better tagging system for organizing issues and much more. Solus Cleanup Crew is also becoming a place where we can onboard new contributors and recruit new staffs. I thought we accomplished a lot and I am happy with it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see from the table above, we just completed two tasks and we are close to completing the homepage task. Packages that do not build also are also getting solved one by one. Right now, there are 12 people in Solus Cleanup Crew Matrix room, 6 of them are new contributors. We also clean up our issue templates, implement a better tagging system for organizing issues and much more. Solus Cleanup Crew is also becoming a place where we can onboard new contributors and recruit new staff. I thought we accomplished a lot and I am happy with it.
```

## What next?
We want to focus on adding appstream metainfo for remaining 200 packages, in line with the goal of 4.7 ISO. It will not be easy nor quick, but we will try our best. We want Solus users to have the best experience possible when we finally say goodbye to `solus-sc` and switch to modern sotware center (Gnome Software and KDE Discover). We want you to be able to install all graphical application from software center and have all the relevant information (Legible screenshot, Hi-Res Icon, good description, etc).

> We also want to add more [monitorng.yml](https://help.getsol.us/docs/packaging/monitoring.yml) file to packages, so we can utilize our proof-of-concept ["Package Update Monitor"](https://shared.getsol.us/justin/updates/) created by [Justin Zobel](https://github.com/Justinzobel). I, myself and [Joey Riches](https://github.com/joebonrichie) will explore about the possibilty of curating  our own "Editor's Choice" and "Featured Apps" in Gnome Software, made possible by [`gnome-app-list`](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gnome-app-list). I think the road ahead is very exciting for us and hopefully for you too!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also want to add more [monitorng.yml](https://help.getsol.us/docs/packaging/monitoring.yml) files to packages, so we can utilize our proof-of-concept ["Package Update Monitor"](https://shared.getsol.us/justin/updates/) created by [Justin Zobel](https://github.com/Justinzobel). I, myself and [Joey Riches](https://github.com/joebonrichie) will explore the possibilty of curating  our own "Editor's Choice" and "Featured Apps" in Gnome Software, made possible by [`gnome-app-list`](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gnome-app-list). I think the road ahead is very exciting for us and hopefully for you too!
```
